Msg #5647 posted 04/06/86  by Lee Rimar
To: Frank Gaude'     About: Kaypro Disk (re ZNEWS407) (19 lines)

I have some questions on the new Bootable Disk Z-SYSTEM for Kaypro:
1.  What version of ZCPR3 comes with it?  3.3, S3, or B3?  Other?
2.  What's the difference between the three packages?  What I really
need to know is:  which features are implemented in which versions?
3.  Do any IOPs actually come with the disk?  Or does "including IOPs"
just mean the package space is allocated?
4.  Has the bug in ZRDOS's automatic disk re-logging been fixed yet?
5.  I'm using Micro-Cornucopia's PRO-8 monitor and 2 TEAC-55F drives.
The native format is 96TPI, 785K per diskette.  Can I sysgen a quad
density diskette with a bootable Z-SYSTEM?  I also have a Micro Sphere
1-meg RAM disk.  The driver runs above of a 63K CP/M system.  Will the
new Z-SYSTEM work with this hardware?
6.  How much of the operating system reloads from the system track
during a Warm Boot?  The PRO-8 ROM needs both the CCP and the BDOS to
reload; otherwise the density checking routines don't work right.
7.  Do I have to return any or all of my Z-COM diskettes for updating?
Or can you send the upgrade if I give you my registration number?
8.  If I order by phone with my VISA, when will I get the package?
        Looking forward to your usual speedy reply...    LDR

Msg #5660 posted 04/07/86  by David McCord
To: Lee Rimar     About: Kaypro Disk (re ZNEWS407) (53 lines)

I saw your question for Frank and decided to jump in and reply.
Hope you don't mind.  Here are the answers:
1.   The  version  of ZCPR3 used in the bootable Kaypro disks  is 
     ZCPR3.0.
2.   There  are actually five "versions" of the  bootable  Kaypro 
     disk.     Which  "version" is right for you is determined by 
     what model Kaypro you are using.  The following is a list of 
     the five types of models supported:

      - Pre-84 non-video models
      - 4-84 and 2X video models
      - K10 w/rev D BIOS
      - K10 w/rev F or G BIOS
      - Any model equipped with Advent Turbo-rom.

     A  bootable  Kaypro  disk will only  support  one  of  these 
     model types.

     Each  version  has a MENU/ZEX system to sysgen  3  different 
     configurations of the Z-System.  One configuration is a full 
     5k overhead,  another is a 4k overhead, and the last is a 1k 
     overhead.   So,  you may pick your system configuration from 
     these  three  choices,  no  matter which  "version"  of  the 
     bootable Kaypro disk you are using.
3.   IOP   space   is  allocated  in  the  5k   overhead   system 
     configurations.   Actual  IOP's are not included.   This  is 
     very similar to Z-Com.  However, if you are not going to use 
     an IOP,  then you may use a system configuration that allows 
     you to recover the space normally allocated to an IOP.  This 
     is different than Z-Com.
4.   The version of ZRDOS included with the bootable Kaypro disks 
     is  ZRDOS  1.3;  this contains a fix for the spurious  drive 
     select  error that has shown up in ZRDOS 1.2  (Public  ZRDOS 
     Plus) and previous.  ZRDOS 1.3 is an upgrade of 1.2.
5.   The  sysgen  utility used with the bootable Kaypro disks  is 
     TURBOGEN  by Plu*Perfect.   It is my understanding  that  it 
     will work with any ROM or drive types.
     The  question  of whether a 63k system may be  generated  is 
     best  left to the system integrators of the bootable  Kaypro 
     disks, Richard Jacobson and Bruce Morgen.  I do not know the 
     answer.  (They may be contacted via E-Mail on Z-Node Central 
     or the Lillipute Z-Node in Chicago.)
6.   I believe, but am not certain, that a warm boot reloads both 
     the  ZCPR3 Command Processor and ZRDOS.   Again,  I defer to 
     Jacobson and Morgen as the final authorities.
7.   The  bootable Kaypro disks are not a substitute  or  upgrade 
     for Z-Com; they are an independent product.
8.   Echelon is happy to accept VISA/MC credit cards;  UPS COD or 
     personal  check is also accepted.   As stated in the  Z-NEWS 
     newsletter, they are shipping NOW.
 
Feel free to ask me any further questions on this.
.....Dave (sysop)
