
			       M D I S K

      A fast 1 megabyte RAM disk for your AMPRO Z80 Little Board!


If you use an AMPRO Z80 Little Board, contact us about our MDISK RAM
disk.  MDISK is an add-on RAM disk board for the AMPRO Z80 Little Board
that provides space for up to 1 megabyte of 256k dynamic RAM chips that
are used as a solid state disk drive.

MDISK provides a fast and responsive RAM workspace environment to speed
up disk-intensive operations like wordprocessing, database access and
program development by reducing the time required for disk read/write
operations.  Now you can read or write to RAM disk files at RAM memory
speeds!  Add MDISK to an all-floppy system for especially useful
improvements in speed and productivity.

Because programs resident on MDISK are accessed at memory speeds, all
your often-used utilities become 'memory-resident'.  The transient
versions of your Z utilities now operate as quickly as the much more
limited versions resident in your RCP!	With CMDRUN.COM and ALIAS.CMD
resident on MDISK, you also can have a full range of instant aliases at
your fingertips.


  o  MDISK is a 5.75" x 5.25" printed circuit board that plugs
     into your AMPRO Z80 socket.  The Z80 chip plugs into a
     socket on the MDISK board.  Board-to-board spacing is 1/2"
     with an overall total height of 1 1/4".

  o  You plug up to 32 standard Japanese 256k dynamic RAM chips
     into the sockets provided on MDISK for up to 1 megabyte of
     extended RAM.

  o  The MDISK driver software enables the extended RAM to be
     used as a solid state disk drive, complete with a system
     track for instant warm boots.  The driver software is
     supplied as a boot-time utility for use with standard AMPRO
     systems, including extended ZCPR3 systems and NZCOM, that
     use the current BIOS version 3.8.	Source code for the BIOS
     driver inserts is also included for custom installation into
     your AMPRO BIOS source code.  The MDISK drivers are
     completely integrated into the memory image of the BIOS and
     do NOT load under the CCP.

  o  MDISK includes an extended RAM test utility.

  o  MDISK requires 5vdc via standard disk drive power connector.

  o  In order to use MDISK, your Little Board must be modified to
     replace the eight 64k RAM chips with the sockets we provide
     and to add one jumper.  If you can use a soldering iron,
     this is an easy modification and doesn't affect normal
     operation of the Little Board.  Complete instructions are
     included.	If you feel uneasy about working on your Little
     Board, n/SYSTEMS can arrange to do the modification for you
     at nominal cost.


The MDISK RAM disk board (0k RAM supplied), including complete manual
and software disk, is only $149 plus $5 shipping and handling.
California residents add 6% sales tax.	COD costs an additional $5.

Orders with accompanying check or money order are normally shipped the
same day they are received.  Shipping is via first class mail, but
orders can be shipped UPS if requested.  COD orders are shipped UPS
only.
c˜