GETVAR12.DOC
September 6, 1987

Description of GETVAR12.Z80/.COM

This is a modification of the ZCPR3 utility GETVAR; only the changes are 
described here.  Full documentation of this utility can be found in the 
library file SHUTILS2.LBR, previously released.

The transformation from version 1.1 to 1.2 has involved the following 
changes:

1.  You may now abort the operation by typing a Control-C in the first 
    position on the line.  The contents of the shell variable will then be 
    unchanged.  If the shell variable had not been defined previously, it 
    will not be defined after an abort.  If it had been previously defined, 
    its contents will be unchanged.  If a Control-C is struck in any other 
    position, it will be inserted in the line.  If you want your response 
    to have a Control-C character in the first position, you may accomplish 
    this by putting the Control-C in any position but the first and then 
    deleting all characters in front of it.

2.  The input editor now scrolls the entered text within the remainder of 
    the physical line following the prompt, allowing you to move and edit 
    freely within the line.  You may enter up to 127 characters.  Prompts 
    may be longer than the screen width.  The line editor control keys are:

	^S or left-arrow key if defined in TCAP   : move left 1 char
	^D or right-arrow key if defined in TCAP  : move right 1 char
	^E  : erase to [E]nd of line
	^U  : delete char [U]nder cursor
	^W  : delete [W]ord forward
	^X  : kill entire line
	DEL : delete char before cursor
	TAB : move to end of line, or if at end, to beginning
	^A  : move to beginning of previous word
	^F  : move to beginning of next word
	^H  : delete char before cursor
	^Q  : [Q]uote next char--insert char literal
	^C  : abort if at beginning of line.

    Cursor keys are evaluated first, and may mask later functions.  For 
    instance, the left-arrow key on '83 Kaypros generates a ^H and 
    therefore the backspace key will move left rather than deleting left.  
    These editor commands are identical to those used in SH v. 2.0, except 
    of course, that command history recall is not possible from within 
    GETVAR, and ^X will not allow you to exit from GETVAR.

This revision was produced for Rick Charnes.


Dreas Nielsen
16713 SE 12th St.
Bellevue, WA   98008
(206) 746-2782
