EASE -- Error and Shell Editor, Version 2.0 -- Paul Pomerleau, 4/18/88

                          Changes in 2.0

To EASE:
--------

  Variables which point to location in the history file 
have been moved from the shell stack to the registers.  
Registers 7-9 (setable by user) are used for EASE.  The 
variables can also be put in any SAFE memory location at 
least 3 bytes long.
  Advantages:
  1. Shell stack entry is smaller.
  2. Shell stack entry will never contain nulls (which 
     might confuse a Z program which uses the stack).
  3. Data not lost when in another shell.
       EASE's Error Handler and 'C' option can count on 
     the information, so both now can read and write to the 
     history file.
  4. VARPACK can now communicate with EASE, so users may 
     VARPACK whenever they want without having to leave 
     EASE first.

  Undo now supported for ^Q^Y, ^T and ^Q<DEL>.  This means 
that ALL large delete functions can now be Undone.

  Filename completeion added -- Type a partial filename and 
hit TAB.  Filename is completed.  Subsequent TABS produce 
more matches to filename.

       Changes suggested by Bridger Mitchell and 
	 implemented in his EASE version 1.6z.

The use of Bdos function 6 for input on CP/M+ systems.
  "This is ESSENTIAL for CP/M Plus, which defaults
to flow control (^S,^Q,^C,^P) for functions 1,2,9 and 10.
Function 6 WOULD BE preferable for any program doing its
own editing (unless it need to get a nul character from
the terminal, which Function 6 cannot do).
However, CP/M 2.2 BDOS and ZRDOS vers. < 1.9 contain a function 6
bug.  To get around this the original EASE "cin" function
code that calls bdos function 1 has been retained when
executed under CP/M 2...."
	
The extension of error messages for ZCPR 3.4

The "Generalized HALTSUB and GETCCP to support CP/M Plus and 
  extended environment (in Z34SLR.REL)."

The addition of a local stack, "due to apparent overflow 
  when modifying a command line in error-handler mode."


To VARPACK:
-----------

  VARPACK is MUCH faster and is no longer case sensitive 
when looking for duplications.

  Due to register use, VARPACK may now be excuted whenever 
desired.  EASE will read in the new information about the 
history file.



                          Changes in 1.6

Changes to Shell:
-----------------

  'C' Option -- 'EASE C' allows the user to edit just one command, 
this is useful if user command input is desired from any shell such as 
ZFILER or MENU.  Thanks to Al Grabauskas for this easy to implement 
change.

  Internal SMARTSAV option -- SMARTSAV set checks to see if the 
command line was recalled with a ^B or ^N or ^O and not edited.  If 
it has not been edited, it is not saved.  This means you might 
execute a command and NOT find it as the last command typed (ie. ^B 
would not recall it, though a ^O would).  This should be used by 
those more interested in speed (no saving time) or VAR file space 
than with convenience.

To Error Handler:
-----------------

  User is no longer prompted for Edit or Abort, unless he is running 
a ZEX script.  Instead, the faulty command is put on the command 
line, and the user may edit same.  This reduces number of keystrokes.

  BEEPFLG -- Error Handler may beep or not beep on error.

To VARPACK:
-----------

  VARPACK now does not default to packing (deleting duplicates).  
This makes VARPACK fast for startup aliases to cut down VAR files to 
a certain size.

to packing (deleting duplicates)