
COMMAND LINE DEFAULTS:  The command line option pairs "A"/"C" and "O"/"T" 
can be configured to default when neither of a pair is given.  Some other 
command line options are toggles ("S", "F", "H", "Q", and "P") which can 
turn a feature on or off depending on the defaults chosen.

Option A -- Operating mode.  The two operating modes are concatenation of 
the source files into a new destination file, as the name of the program 
implies, and appending the source files to an already existing destination 
file.  As released the default is "Concat".  You can make "Append" the 
default, if you do more appending than concatenating.  The mode selected 
can be changed with the command line options "C" and "A".

Option O -- File format mode.  This option determines how CONCAT joins the 
files.  In "Text" mode the files are joined wherever the CP/M end-of-file 
character is found, even in the middle of a sector.  In "Binary" (object) 
mode the files are joined only on record boundaries and the end-of-file 
character is ignored.  "Text" is the correct setting for most uses, but if 
you use CONCAT mostly for binary files (for some strange reason!), you can 
make that the default here.  The format selected can be changed with the 
command line options "T" and "O".

Option S -- Disk space checking.  As distributed CONCAT checks for adequate 
free space before doing any writing to disk.  If you're courageous, you can 
turn off this feature by toggling it to "No".  Space checking can then be 
turned back on with the command line "S" option.

Option F -- File stamp transfer.  In concatenation mode CONCAT transfers 
the create date stamp of the first source file to the new file.  (If any 
source file has the same name as the destination file, its file stamp will 
be used instead.)  If you prefer, change this option to "No" to turn this 
feature off by default.  It can then be turned back on with the command 
line "F" option.  Under Z3Plus the F option is not available (always off).

Option H -- Filter high bits and control characters.  If "Yes" is selected, 
CONCAT will, by default, reset high bits as they are output and eliminate 
control characters other than carriage return, line feed, form feed, and 
horizontal tab.  This feature is useful for redirected output to CON: or 
LST:, but it is not always desirable otherwise.  The default selected can 
be toggled with the command line "H" option.

Option Q -- Quiet mode.  This option selects whether CONCAT will be in 
verbose or quiet mode by default.  In quiet mode only error messages are 
displayed.  The default may be toggled with the command line "Q" option.

Option P -- Screen and printer paging.  During redirected output to CON: or 
LST:, paging can be selected.  When paging is in effect, CON: output waits 
for a keypress each time the screen fills, while LST: output sends a form 
feed at the end of each page to skip over the perforations.  Paging is not 
available for disk file or AUX: output.  The selected default can be 
toggled with the "P" option on the command line.

PERMANENT OPTIONS:  The following options are permanent configurations that 
cannot be changed from the command line.

Option D -- Date format.  If the "D" command line option is used to insert 
the current date and time into the destination file, the date can be in 
either "American" (December 13, 1990), "European" (13 December 1990), or 
"Japanese" (1990 December 13) format.  It's your choice.

Option T -- Time format.  If the "D" command line option is used to insert 
the current date and time into the destination file, the time can be in 
"Civilian" format (12-hour time, e.g., "3:21 pm") or "Military" format (24- 
hour time, e.g., "15:21"), whichever your prefer.

Option C -- Default case.  This option selects the default case of the 
divider string if it is entered from the command line.  It does not affect 
the operation of the "%<" and "%>" escape sequences, nor does it affect the 
internally configured divider string.

Option L -- Line feed after carriage return.  During redirected input from 
CON:, a line feed must ordinarily be typed after a carriage return.  If you 
prefer that CONCAT output the line feed automatically, select "Yes" here.

Option E -- Error on user abort.  Choose here whether you want the program 
error flag set and the error handler invoked when CONCAT is aborted with a 
^C, ^K, or ^X.  Calling the error handler is sometimes advantageous because 
it allows cancelling a SUB or ZEX batch job, but some people might not want 
the aggravation.

Option Z -- End-of-file character for AUX:.  This byte tells CONCAT when it 
has reached the end of auxiliary input.  CONCAT also sends this character 
at the end of redirected auxiliary output.  The default is ^Z (1Ah), the 
normal CP/M end-of-file character.  If you have a special need, any other 
character from 00h to FFh can be entered here.

CONFIGURABLE STRINGS:  When changing the following strings, a carriage 
return ends input.  To enter a carriage return and line feed sequence into 
the string, use the ECHO-type escape sequence "^M^J".  Other control 
characters can be entered the same way.  A delete character can be entered 
with "%D", a carat with "%^", and a percent sign with "%%".  It is not 
necessary to use the "%<" and "%>" sequences for upper- and lower-case 
because characters will be printed in the same case they are entered.

Option P -- Date and time prefix.  If the command line "D" option is used, 
this string is output just before the date and time.  Up to 20 characters 
are accepted.

Option S -- Date and time suffix.  If the command line "D" option is used, 
this string is output just after the date and time.  Up to 20 characters 
are accepted.

Option I -- Default divider insert.  If the command line "I" option is 
used, but it is not followed by a divider string, then this default divider 
string is output between each concatenated or appended file.  Up to 76 
characters are accepted.
