
                         CONCAT HISTORY


Version 1.8 -- October 31, 1993 -- Gene Pizzetta
     CONCAT was not properly inserting a date (D option) or a 
     divider string before redirected input from CON or AUX.  The 
     fix required relocation of some code into new subroutines.  
     This problem, reported by Howard Goldstein, has existed 
     since version 1.5.  Thanks, Howard.  A few other minor code 
     changes were made, hopefully without introducing any new 
     bugs!

Version 1.7 -- September 8, 1993 -- Gene Pizzetta
     CONCAT now allows embedded slashes and spaces in the option 
     list following the initial slash (actually, spaces were 
     always allowed).  This should allow more flexible use of 
     aliases.  In addition, the Japanese date format, with the 
     year first, is now a configuration option for option D.  A 
     bug has been fixed that under some conditions set the error 
     flag after the usage screen was displayed and could cause 
     the error handler to be invoked.  A few other minor code 
     changes were made and the documentation was converted to a 
     standard ZCPR3 help file.

     While I was at it:  Almost three years ago Ed Flinn reported 
     to me that CONCAT did some strange things under Z3Plus on 
     his Commodore 128 when date stamp transfer was enabled.  My 
     Commodore was long ago given away and I still can't 
     duplicate his symptoms running ZPM3 under MyZ80.  But to 
     eliminate any possible problems, when CONCAT discovers it's 
     running under CP/M Plus, it now disables file stamp transfer 
     and omits mention of the F option on the usage screen.

Version 1.6 -- November 11, 1991 -- Gene Pizzetta
     A few hours after release of 1.5, I discovered that 
     redirected input produced an error if space checking was on 
     and CON: or AUX: was the only input specification.  Such is 
     life; it has been fixed.  In addition, entering control 
     characters during console input could cause strange things 
     to happen to the screen.  Console input echo now uses CCOUT 
     which displays control characters as "^c", except for 
     carriage return, linefeed, backspace, bell, and null.  
     Redirected console output is *not* automatically filtered.

Version 1.5 -- November 7, 1991 -- Gene Pizzetta
     Many changes.  Now accepts "CON:", "LST:", or "AUX:" in 
     place of a destination file for redirected output to 
     console, printer, or auxiliary device (punch).  Output to 
     console and printer can be paged by using the new "P" 
     command line option.  Also accepts "CON:" and "AUX:" in 
     place of a source file for redirected input from console or 
     auxiliary device (reader).  Redirected input must end with a 
     ^Z.  Can be configured to output a line feed after every 
     carriage return during CON: input.  New "H" option causes 
     high bits to be reset and control characters to be removed 
     from the output stream.  Option I changed so it does not 
     have to be at end of option list:  first character after the 
     I is taken to be a delimiter and the string ends when a 
     second occurrence of the delimiter is found or at the end of 
     the command line.  The delimiter must be non-alphanumeric.  
     Several new, more specific error messages.  User abort with 
     ^C can be configured to set the error flag or not.  
     Date/time prefix and suffix strings (option D) and divider 
     string (option I) can now be configured with ZCNFG.  
     Replaced VLIB routines with ZSLIB HV routines to save space. 
     Made several code changes and deletions, and added some 
     additional library routines to improve efficiency.  Now 
     aborts with ^C, ^K, or ^X, or their upper- or lower-case 
     counterparts.

Version 1.4 -- May 28, 1991 -- Gene Pizzetta
     Bug Fix:  For want of an "OR A", the European date for the D 
     option did not work.  It does now.

Version 1.3 -- February 23, 1991 -- Gene Pizzetta
     Bug Fix:  Option I was also toggling option F (a missing 
     RET).  Bug found by Howard Goldstein corrected:  File date 
     stamp was not being written properly for files larger than 
     one physical extent (FCB is now being re-initialized before 
     writing stamp).  Option I now accepts divider string on 
     command line (another suggestion from Howard), using 
     standard ECHO-type escape sequences.  Option I MUST be the 
     last command line option given!

Version 1.2 -- February 11, 1991 -- Bruce Morgen
     Uses the CPR parser whenever possible to further enhance 
     invalid directory reporting, otherwise use ZPRSFN as in 
     Version 1.1.  New routine is at Zparse:.  Fixed a string at 
     JUL: that befuddled poor old M80.  Did some not-terribly- 
     significant code tweaks (this is a very nicely crafted tool, 
     to say the least!)

Version 1.1 -- February 2, 1991 -- Gene Pizzetta
     Added error code 19 (invalid option), 12 (memory overflow), 
     and 2 (invalid directory) for error handler.  Converted to 
     Zilog mnemonics.  Added check for ZCPR3 before doing 
     anything.  Several code optimizations.  Most defaults made 
     configurable using ZCNFG.  Added C (concatenate) and T (text 
     files) for normal defaults.  File date stamping support:  
     outfile will have the same create date as first infile, 
     unless a later infile has the same name as the outfile.  
     Option F toggles file stamping on or off.  Replaced ZFNAME, 
     which does not set the invalid directory flag, with ZPRSFN 
     parser, which sets it under *some* circumstances.  Added 
     modified civilian time routine that prints "am" or "pm" 
     after time string and modified date routine that outputs 
     American or European date formats (configurable) for D 
     option.  Added I option to insert a divider string between 
     files.

Version 1.0 -- April 24, 1990 -- Gene Pizzetta
     All known bugs fixed, including one that caused problems 
     when no alternate video strings were installed in the TCAP.  
     A special thanks to Howard Goldstein for his efforts to 
     uncover problems and make sure this version works as 
     intended.

Version 0.9 -- April 8, 1990 -- Gene Pizzetta
     Developmental version released for beta test only.  Added 
     disk space checking and S option to turn it off.  Displays 
     actual name of program in usage message.  Invokes error 
     handler on error.  ^C aborts during concatenation, but not 
     during append.

Version 0.8 -- March 8, 1990 -- Gene Pizzetta
     Added D (date) option.  Date string prefix and suffix may be 
     configured (see documentation and code below).  Corrected a 
     minor bug which caused the temporary file not to be erased 
     if the first input file was not found.  Now senses size of 
     TPA and dynamically sets the size of the output buffer up to 
     a maximum of 32K.  Invalid options are no longer ignored, 
     but cause an error.

Version 0.7 -- December 17, 1989 -- Gene Pizzetta
     Added A (append) option, which by-passes several of CONCAT's 
     safety features.  A few more optimizations.

Version 0.6 -- December 3, 1989 -- Gene Pizzetta
     Minor changes in setting error flag.  Corrected serious 
     error in detecting top of memory, found by Howard Goldstein, 
     who also suggested several changes to make the code more 
     efficient.  Thanks, Howard.

Version 0.5 -- November 25, 1989 -- Gene Pizzetta
     Added Q (quiet) option and error flag support.  Fixed parser 
     bug that allowed a null output filename.  Now closes output 
     file on error before erasing it.  Tightened code.

Version 0.4 -- November 12, 1989 -- Gene Pizzetta
     Added large output buffer.  Corrected error in parsing 
     filespec in current user.  Relaxed command line syntax: 
     commas no longer required.  Now obeys quiet flag.

Version 0.3 -- September 19, 1989 -- Gene Pizzetta
     First preliminary release.

To report bugs or make suggestions:
     Gene Pizzetta
     481 Revere Street
     Revere, MA 02151

     Voice:  (617) 284-0891
     Newton Centre Z-Node:  (617) 965-7259
     Ladera Z-Node Central:  (213) 670-9465
