Program: NHSH
Author: J. Poplett
Version: 1.0A, started 11/21/86
Date: Dec. 4, '86

     NHSH   is  a  re-write  in  Z80  assembler  of  Michael  M.
Rubenstein's  HSH.  It  duplicates most,  if  not  all,  of  the
functions  of  HSH  and adds a few  new  features.  If  you  are
unfamiliar  with HSH,  I suggest you locate a copy of HSH15.LBR.
For the most part, the documentation for HSH serves equally well
for  NHSH.  Notable  exceptions are that NHSH presently  has  NO
patch points and the number of command histories stored by  NHSH
is fixed at 20.
     NHSH, unlike  HSH, uses a linked-list cache data structure.
Where  HSH  will   record multiple copies of  the  same  command
line, NHSH's cache promotes re-issued commands.  Thus, reissuing
commands  will  not  hog up disk and  TPA  memory  space.  Short
commands,  i.e.  commands of less than four characters,  are not
recorded  by  NHSH  so that the cache is not cluttered  up  with
commands like ''cls'' or ''dir''. NHSH only ''remembers'' unique
command lines of four characters or more.
     The .VAR file NHSH uses to record command histories can  be
edited.  Individual  commands in the .VAR file are distinguished
by   a special character ("%").  Examine a .VAR file produced by
NHSH to  see how it's structured.
     NHSH has an internal command,  "hist",  which displays  the
contents of the cache.
     NHSH  is a blatant clone of Michael Rubenstein's HSH.   The
interface and help display are identical to HSH's.  Since HSH is
copyrighted,  portions  of  NHSH  are rightfully  and  no  doubt
legally  the property of Michael  Rubenstein.  Therefore,  HSH's
distribution proviso holds true for NHSH: "This software and the
accompanying   documentation  may  be  distributed  freely   for
noncommercial  use." The remainder of NHSH,  such as  the  cache
data  structure and much of the internal logic,  are copyrighted
by John H. Poplett. I hope Michael understands NHSH to mean that
imitation is the sincerest form of flattery.
     Please  forward  your  suggestions for improvement  or  bug
notices to The Plaster of Paris Review MBBS (213) 382-2213.
     J. Poplett. Los Angeles, Dec. 1, 1986.

     Copyright 1986 Michael M. Rubenstein.
     Copyright 1986 John H. Poplett.
