     ZRDOS Version 1.2 Additions and Modifications to ZRDOS


                      ZRDOS 1.2 ERROR CODES

     Inorder to make more efficent use of code space,  the  error
messages  have been removed from ZRDOS 1.2 and replaced with  the
error codes described below.


ZRDOS Error 1 - A disk read error occured.

     A  ZRDOS  error  1 message is given whenever  any  error  is
detected  during the reading or writing of a sector on the  disk.
After the message is given, the Z-System waits for console input.
If <ENTER> is pressed the bad sector is ignored and the operation
continues. If <CTL-C> is pressed, the operation (and the program)
is  aborted,  a warm boot is done,  and the system returns to the
command level.

     NOTE: In the case of a write operation, pressing <ENTER> can
jeopardize  the integrity of data on the diskette  being  written
to.
                   ---------------------------

ZRDOS Error 2 - A drive selection error occured.

     A  ZRDOS error 2 message is given when an attempt is made to
select  a  drive  which is not valid on  the  system.  After  the
message  is  given, a warm boot will occur and  the  system  will
return to the command level.

                   ---------------------------

ZRDOS Error 3 - A read only disk error occured.

     A  ZRDOS error 3 message is given when an attempt is made to
write on a disk that has been set to "read only" status.  A  disk
can  be set to "read only" status with the SRO utility program or
a standard system call.  After a error 3 message is given, a warm
boot will occur and the system will return to the command level.

                   ---------------------------

ZRDOS Error 4 - A read only file error occured.

     A  ZRDOS error 4 message is given when an attempt is made to
write to,  rename, or erase a file that is marked as "read only".
Once  the  message is given,  a warm boot occurs and  the  system
returns to the command level.

     NOTE:  A  warm  boot has no effect on a file that  has  been
tagged as "read only".

.pa

ZRDOS Error 5 - A disk changed error occured.

     A  ZRDOS error 5 message is given when an attempt is made to
write  to  a file on a disk that has been changed while the  file
was still open on the previous disk.  After a error 5 message  is
given,  a  warm boot will occur and the system will return to the
command level.

                   ---------------------------

ZRDOS Error 6 - A wheel protect file error occured.

     A  ZRDOS error 6 message is given when an attempt is made to
write to,  rename,  set file attributes,  or erase a file that is
marked  as  "wheel protected" and the Z-System wheel byte is  not
set.   Once  the  message is given,  a warm boot occurs  and  the
system returns to the command level.

     NOTE:  A  warm  boot has no effect on a file that  has  been
tagged as "wheel protected".  The wheel protect file attribute of
a wheel protected file can only be changed when the wheel byte is
set.

                   ---------------------------

     The  above information is also available online thru the use
of  the ZRDOS 1.2 utility DOSERR.COM.  To display the information
for a given dos error type:

     DOSERR n

     Where 'n' is the ZRDOS error number you wish to review.

.pa

                        PUBLIC USER AREAS

     ZRDOS  1.2 uses bytes 126 and 127 (the last 2  bytes  before
Z3TCAP)  of  the  Z3  environment discriptor as  mask  bytes  for
setting  PUBLIC  user areas.  Byte 126 is the mask byte  for  the
drives that are to be allowed to contain public user areas.  Byte
127  contains  the mask byte for the declared public user  areas.
Public  user areas can be on drives A - H and can be assigned  to
user  areas  1 - 8.  Any file kept in a public user area  can  be
accessed  directly from any other user area on the same drive  as
long as the fcb specifying the file contains no wild  cards.  The
mask bytes are as follows:

          Drive Byte (126)             User Byte (127)

   Bit    7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0              7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
          | | | | | | | |              | | | | | | | |
   Drive  H G F E D C B A   User Area  8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

     The  setting and displaying of these bytes is done with  the
ZRDOS 1.2 utility, PUBLIC.COM (see section on ZRDOS 1.2 Utilities
for more details).

     A  PUBLIC  user area is a handy place to keep  the  overlays
used  by programs such as WordStar,  dBASE II,  and SuperCalc  as
well  as many other commercially available  programs.  With  some
programs, like WordStar (which first try to load the overlay from
the current drive/user then default to drive A) the overlay files
can  be kept in a PUBLIC user area on drive A and be accessed  by
the program from any other drive and/or user area. Other programs
such  as dBASE II and SuperCalc require that the overlays  be  on
the  currently logged in drive,  but if declared PUBLIC any  user
area.

     A PUBLIC user area could also be assigned to basic files for
Mbasic.  For example lets say we want to use drive B user area  6
as  a PUBLIC user area for our basic programs and that we want to
keep  Mbasic on drive A.  As long as we are logged onto  drive  B
(any user area) Mbasic can access our programs as follows:

B1>MBASIC MYPROG       -   User  is on same drive  but  different
                           user area.

     or

C3>MBASIC B:MYPROG     -   User  is  on different drive and  user
                           area but specifies drive.

     As can be seen from above this allows the user a great  deal
of  flexablity  and  can  be used to better  organize  files  and
disk/user areas.
.pa

                   ZRDOS Version 1.2 Utilities

     Besides  the standard ZRDOS utilities several new  utilities
have  been  added to manipulate and support the  PUBLIC  feature.
These utilities are as follows:

     PUBLIC.COM     - Allows user to set, clear or display PUBLIC
                      user status.

     DIR.COM        - This version of the ZCPR3 directory utility
                      supports  the  displaying  of  PUBLIC  user
                      areas.

     DOSERR.COM     - This  utility,   as  previously  described,
                      displays   information  pertaining  to  the
                      error codes generated by ZRDOS 1.2.

     VTYPE.COM      - A  full screen video oriented file  display
                      utility.

.pa

                       THE PUBLIC UTILITY

     The utility PUBLIC.COM is the utility used to manipulate the
PUBLIC feature of ZRDOS 1.2. A sample use session follows.

     In  the first sample we display PUBLIC.COM's built  in  help
information.

B0:WORK>PUBLIC //
PUBLIC Version 1.0
Syntax:
        PUBLIC
or      PUBLIC /oooo...
Options:
        Cc - Clear PUBLIC declarations
         c=A Clear All PUBLIC declarations
         c=D Clear PUBLIC User Area Drive
         c=U Clear PUBLIC User
        Dd - Declare Drive=d, PUBLIC
        Uu - Declare User=u, PUBLIC

B0:WORK>

     In the following example we will setup user areas 4 and 8 on
drive A as PUBLIC user areas.


B0:WORK>PUBLIC /CA,DA,U4,U8    ; Here we first clear any existing
                                 settings, then declare drive 'A'
                                 user '4' and '8' to be public.

                                 Note: The commas are optional.

     PUBLIC  then preforms the requested operation  and  displays
the results as follows:

PUBLIC Version 1.0

Public User Area Drive(s): A
Public User Area(s): 4, 8

B0:WORK>

     If  we  only want to display the current settings,  we  only
need enter the program name as follows:

B0:WORK>PUBLIC
PUBLIC Version 1.0

Public User Area Drive(s): A
Public User Area(s): 4, 8

B0:WORK>
.pa


                        VTYPE VERSION 2.0


An Introduction to VTYPE

     VTYPE  is  a  bi-directional  video  oriented  file  display
utility  that allows the user to brows through a file in much the
same  manner he would a book.  VTYPE has the ability to find  and
display user selected text strings. VTYPE quickly moves around in
a text file with simple Wordstar like control commands.

     VTYPE  uses  the  ZCPR3 environmental and  Z3TCAPS  data  to
determine  the  chacteristics of your terminal.  Displayed  lines
which  exceed  the length of your terminal are truncated.  A  hi-
lighted  +  is displayed at the end of the line to indicate  this
condition.

     The form of the VTYPE command is as follows:

          VTYPE DU:ufn


The VTYPE Command Menu


                  <<<<< VTYPE Version 2.0 >>>>>

                          Command Menu

           SCREEN COMMANDS               FIND COMMANDS
     ^R -- Backup one screen       ^F -- Find String
     ^C -- Advance one screen      ^N -- Find again
     ^S -- Backup n screens
     ^D -- Advance n screens              OPTIONS
                                    P -- Printer on/off
           LINE COMMANDS            R -- Scroll Rate: 0
     ^W -- Backup one line          S -- Status Line on/off
     ^Z -- Advance one line         T -- Tab Size: 8
     SP -- Scroll start/stop        V -- ZCPR3 Video Mode on/off
                                    W -- WS Mode on/off
           FILE COMMANDS            / -- Menu/Text
     ^T -- Go to top of file
     ^B -- Go to bottom of file     X -- Exit

.pa

                         SCREEN COMMANDS


Control-R Backup one screen        Moves display back one screen.

Control-C Advance one screen       Advances to the next screen.

Control-S Backup n screens         Prompts  - NUMBER OF  SCREENS?
                                   and pages the display backward
                                   the number of screens entered.

Control-D Advance n screens        Prompts  - NUMBER OF  SCREENS?
                                   and  pages the display forward
                                   the number of screens entered.


                   ---------------------------


                          LINE COMMANDS


Control-W Backup one line          Moves display back one line.

Control-Z Advance one line         Advances display by one line.

SPACE Scroll start/stop            Starts   and   stops    screen
                                   scrolling.


                   ---------------------------


                          FILE COMMANDS


Control-T Go to top of file        Reads  in and  displays  first
                                   full screen of file.

Control-B Go to bottom of file     Reads  in  and  displays  last
                                   full screen of file.


.pa

                          FIND COMMANDS


Control-F Find String      Prompts  FIND? and accepts a string of
                           up  to  80  characters.  Then  prompts
                           IGNORE  CASE (Y/N)?.  Where N  is  the
                           default.  A  'Y'  responce will  cause
                           VTYPE  to find any string in the  file
                           that   matchs   the   entered   string
                           regardless of case. Any other responce
                           will cause VTYPE to match only strings
                           which match in both context and case.

Control-N Find again       Finds  the next occurance of the  last
                           found string.


     Found strings are displayed in hi-lighted video.

                   ---------------------------


                             OPTIONS

P Printer on/off                   Toggles output to list  device
                                   on and off.

R Scroll Rate                      Prompts SCROLL RATE (0-9)? and
                                   accepts  a numeric entry  that
                                   controls  the  speed at  which
                                   characters  are  sent  to  the
                                   screen  during scrolling.  The
                                   larger  the number the  slower
                                   the display.

S Status Line on/off               Toggles  the  display   Status
                                   Line on and off.

T Tab Size                         Prompts TAB SIZE?  and accepts
                                   a  numeric entry from 0 to  99
                                   that determines the  expansion
                                   size of tabs.

V ZCPR3 Video Mode on/off          Toggles  the ZCPR3 Video  Mode
                                   on  and off.  ZCPR3 Video Mode
                                   causes characters bracketed by
                                   ^A and ^B to be hi-lighted.

W WS Mode on/off                   Toggles  Wordstar Mode on  and
                                   off.  Wordstar mode causes all
                                   Wordstar  control codes to  be
                                   displayed  as '^char'  in  hi-
                                   lighted video.
.pa

/ Menu/Text                        Toggles  between the text  and
                                   the command menu.

X Exit                             Exits VTYPE.


