                   CPA - ComPare Ascii utility
                        for ZCPR Systems

                by Malcom Kemp and Carson Wilson
                            20 Feb 89

     The CPA utility will analyze two text files on a line by line 
basis, reporting any differences through a split screen with one 
window per file.  For purposes of this utility, lines are limited 
to 1015 characters and are terminated by a <CR><LF> pair.  Also, 
before comparison, all tab characters are expanded.  Lines of 
lengths longer than the screen width will wrap, causing following 
of the lines in BOTH windows to scroll down.

     The utility is invoked as "CPA [dir:]ufn [dir:][ufn]", where 
the file specifications must be unambiguous, but otherwise any 
allowable Z-system specification.  If a file is missing, or a 
line exceeding 1015 characters is found in a file, CPA exits to 
the operating system with the appropriate error message.

     The compare will proceed until a mismatch occurs or until the 
end of one or both files is reached, whichever comes first.  At 
this time, the names and current lines, and file date stamps if 
available are displayed.

     If a mismatch was found, the mismatched line will be shown as 
the last line in each display.  The user can then manipulate the 
lines in each screen to achieve synchronization, and begin the 
compare again.  The compare will continue from the line AFTER the 
displayed line forward.

     If your terminal supports video attributes, the display will 
highlight the text in each window beyond the point of mismatch.  
Under ZSDOS or Z3PLUS, file datestamps are displayed along with 
each filename.  For both systems, the stamp displayed is normally 
the last modify stamp.  If the last modify stamp is not found, the 
create stamp is instead displayed, and the date is followed by a 
lower case 'c'.  Since CP/M Plus defines the same field for either 
the Update or Last Access stamp depending on the disk label, 
stamps designated 'c' may actually be the last access stamp, 
depending on your particular system.  Use the CP/M Plus "SHOW 
d:[LABEL" command to tell what stamps are active on a particular 
disk.

     If no datestamps are available on the disk(s), just the 
filename(s) appear.  If datestamping is active, but the file(s) 
do not have valid stamps (day is not in range 1..31), two dashes 
will appear instead of one between the filename and the line 
number.

     CPA buffers as much of both files a TPA permits.  This 
allows a limited "back up" facility, but if the files are larger 
than the available memory, you will not be able to back up to the 
beginning of one or both files; you must restart CPA to review 
these areas.

     Five commands are available while CPA is active:

     X, ^X     - Scroll the current screen up.

     E, ^E     - Scroll the current screen down.

     <sp>, S   - Switch screens.

     G         - Go on comparing at the next pair of lines.

     ^C        - Abort to operating system.


1.  ^X - Scroll up.

     Pressing X or control-X causes the current screen to scroll 
up (move forward in the file) one line at a time until the end of 
the file is reached.

2.  ^E - Scroll down.

     Pressing E or control-E causes the current screen to 
scroll down (move backward in the file) one line at a time until 
either line one of the file or the beginning of the current 
bufferful of text is reached.  While CPA uses all available 
TPA to buffer text, large files may 

3.  <sp> - Switch screens.

     Pressing the space bar or S toggles scroll control between 
windows.  Scroll up and Scroll down commands now affect the 
alternate window.

4.  G - Go on comparing at the next pair of lines.

     Pressing G causes CPA to continue comparing the files until 
the next mismatch or until the end of one or both files is 
reached.

5.  ^C - Abort to operating system. 

     Pressing control-C at any time aborts the file compare and 
returns you to the operating system.


Carson Wilson is the author of this version of CPA, based on 
Malcom Kemp's original version 1.0.  Carson Wilson is the 
operator at 

         Antelope Freeway Remote Access System, Chicago
                          312/764-5162
                  300/1200/2400 baud - 24 hours
