; ZFILER HISTORY
;
;
; Version 1.0j		May 1, 1988		Jay Sage
;
;   ---	Improved flexibility of group macro operation by putting three items
;	in the configuration page.  The string MACROCMD is a null-terminated
;	string with the group macro command line.  The string MACLEADSTR is
;	a null-terminated string of characters to be written at the beginning
;	of the group macro batch file (ZEX or SUBMIT).  The string MACROFCB
;	marks the file control block for the file with the group macro
;	commands.
;   ---	Fixed a bug in the expansion of file names in macro parameters.
;	The code was not masking out file attributes.  It happened that
;	this did not matter except for blanks with attributes set, but now
;	the code is correct.
;   ---	There is an additional configuration option (last byte in CONFIG
;	section just before OPT string) that allows file names to be shown
;	in lower case.  Set the byte to FF for upper case, 0 for lower case.
;
;
; Version 1.0i		April 14, 1988		Jay Sage
;
;   ---	The source code to 1.0h was lost in a disk crash.  The features have
;	been recreated.  The operation with GO or JUMP has been improved.
;   ---	The shell stack entry now includes the explicit directory where the
;	file was found if Z33 or later is running.
;
;
; Version 1.0h		September 16, 1987	Jay Sage
;
;   ---	Fixed bug in the code for logging in the displayed directory when the
;	Z command is executed.  It was not working correctly under standard
;	ZCPR30 or backgrounder.
;   ---	Added options to control how the ZFILER.CMD macro file is located.  A
;	choice on the option menu allows one to turn on or off searching of
;	the entire path (including current directory).  If that option is off,
;	either the root directory or a specified directory will be used,
;	depending on the configuration of the program.
;   ---	ZFILER can now be reexecuted using the GO command.  I borrowed a trick
;	from Al Hawley.  When invoked originally, ZFILER checks the name used
;	to invoke it.  If the name is 'GO', then a default name stored in an
;	internal buffer is used.  Otherwise, if the name is copied to that
;	buffer from the external FCB.  I believe this change will allow ZFILER
;	to be reconfigured using the 'O' command and then cloned using SAVE.
;   ---	A more extensive user configuration file has been provided which
;	comprises sections of ZFHDR.Z80 (the definitions file) and ZFMAIN.Z80
;	(the beginning of the main code).  As before, reconfiguration can be
;	carried out by editing ZFCNFH.Z80 and assembling it to a HEX file.
;	Then "MLOAD ZFNEW=ZF0LD.COM,ZFCNFH" will install the changes.
;
;
; Version 1.0g		August 23, 1987		Carson Wilson
;
;   ---	Reverse video, dim, or '_' are now used on the status line to display 
;	all current file attributes.  'r' read-only tags were interfering with 
;	the tagging commands and are no longer used.
;   --- Corrected bug preventing view/unsqueeze of squeezed system files.
;   --- Corrected bug causing squeezed read-only files to be unsqueezed as 
;	system files when copying attributes.
;   ---	Made invalid command display show actual command.
;   --- Removed ZFILER command on exit to avoid confusion between system and 
;	ZFILER's 'Z' command.
;   --- Fixed initial help screen from command line.
;   --- Added space before 'OK' after copy/unsqueeze.
;
; Version 1.0f		June 12, 1987		Jay Sage
;
;   ---	Added rudimentary group macro capability by having ZFILER construct
;	and invoke a ZEX script.
;
; Version 1.0c		April 27, 1987		Jay Sage
;
;   ---	Made changes for compatibility with ZCPR33.  Now on manual invocation
;	ZFILER returns to the command processor if ZEX is running so that ZEX
;	can continue to supply commands even if there are no more commands on
;	the current command line.
;
; Version 1.0b		January 13, 1987	Jay Sage
;
;   ---	Added DateStamper support.  Now on file copies and moves, the
;	time and date stamp of the source file is carried to the destination.
;
;   --- Modified handling of directories with 'L' (or 'N') command.  The
;	code now respects the DUOK flag in the environment.  If it is set,
;	then any attempt to log in a directory is checked against the maxdrive
;	and maxuser values in the environment.  If the request passes that
;	test, then the directory is logged in even if it had been specified
;	using a DIR form and even if a password is associated with it.  If the
;	requested directory is beyond the maxdrive/maxuser range or if DUOK is
;	not set, then the named directory register is checked.  Passwords are
;	checked as needed using improved code (shorter and more accurate).
;
;   --- Added small bit of code to the ZFILER initialization to change the JP
;	opcode at 100H to RET so that ZFILER cannot be rerun using the "GO"
;	command (this has bad consequences, since the shell stack entry then
;	would have the command "GO" stored in it!).
;
;
; Version 1.0a		January 1, 1987		Jay Sage
;
;   --- IMPORTANT CHANGE: To make ZFILER consistent with other script
;	processing programs, the default parameter designation character
;	has been changed from '%' to '$'.  The parameter '$', an alternate
;	for 'P' (completed Pointed-to-file spec: du:name.typ) was therefore
;	eliminated.  These changes will require editing of any VFILER.CMD
;	file when converting to ZFILER.CMD (the macro file used by ZFILER).
;   --- Modified the way the shell stack entry is used.  It now keeps
;	both the original directory and the requested directory on the
;	stack.  This has two major advantages.  By keeping the original
;	directory on the stack, on exit with the 'X' command ZFILER can
;	return to the directory from which it was originally invoked no
;	matter how many other directories have been logged in by use of
;	the 'Z' command or a macro.  Keeping the requested (displayed)
;	directory on the shell stack avoids the problem with a passworded
;	directory of having to reenter the password every time ZFILER
;	returned from a macro or 'Z' operation.
;   --- Added feature with 'Z' command to allow avoidance of the "Strike
;	any Key" message on return to ZFILER.  If the command line entered
;	with the 'Z' command begins with a space, then shell waiting will
;	be disabled.
;   --- Fixed a bug caused by the GA command.  Once that command was used,
;	an archiving flag was set and never cleared.  A later GC command
;	then used the group-archive prompting options instead of the
;	group-copy options.  This flag is now reset before all group
;	operations.
;   --- Added option on file copy and unsqueeze functions to allow
;	the destination file attributes to be set to those of a file
;	that is being overwritten.  If there is no such file and the
;	attribute setting option is engaged, then the source file
;	attributes will be used.
;   --- Changed code for file viewing so that scrolling will stop
;	at the end of a file (carriage return and space will not
;	cause the next file to start).  Only control-X or control-C
;	will be effective at the end of file.  Also added control-Z
;	option to go straight to the end of file without paging.
;   --- Changed the code that allows interruption of group operations
;	so that a carriage return will not cause an abort (many users
;	answer some prompts that require no return with a return and
;	found that group operations worked only on the first file).
;	Any character other than carriage return will abort mass
;	operations.
;   --- Made it possible to get the macro help screen by pressing
;	the leadin character a second time in response to the 'Macro'
;	prompt (this is much easier and more natural than entering
;	the '#' command).
;   --- Fixed a bug in the macro help display that was echoing control
;	characters to the screen.  These are now filtered.  One can now
;	enter ESC ESC to see the macro help screen and a third ESC to
;	return to the file display.
;   --- Added ^J command to jump to next file that matches the last
;	mask specified in a "J" command.  This allows one to jump
;	easily to the second or third file that matches a simple
;	file spec.
;   --- Fixed bug in "M" and "GM" commands that allowed source file
;	to be deleted even when copy had not been performed.
;   --- Added "GR" group reverse function to reverse file tags.
;	Tagged files become untagged; untagged files become tagged;
;	and soft-tagged files remain soft-tagged.
;   --- Cleaned up log command ("L" or "N").  Removed special
;	handling of answer "x" for directory name (no longer needed)
;	and changed error handling code.
;   --- Added a configuration option to automatically log in the
;	displayed directory for the "Z" command if the user number is
;	less than 16.  If this option is configured in, then the disk
;	system is reset before the command line is run (this is the
;	disadvantage of using this option).
;   --- Made rename command preserve all file attributes.
;   --- Added options to copy attributes with files and to always set
;	the archive attribute in the destination file.  If the file
;	is being moved, the attributes are always copied and the
;	archive bit is left as it was; if the file is being
;	unsqueezed, the attributes are not copied and the archive bit
;	is set according to its option setting.
;
;-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
;
; See the VFHIST.DOC file in VFILER Version 4.1 for the history of the
; development of VFILER.
                                                                    