
                                D
                    A ZCPR3 Directory Program
                           Version 1.5

         Version 1.5 and Documentation by Gene Pizzetta
                         October 6, 1989
                 Original Program by Hank Blake


D has long been my favorite directory program.  It provides a 
number of features not provided by other directory utilities.  
The display is in lowercase, which makes it more readable to most 
people.  In addition, it shows total disk capacity, the total 
number of bytes used by the displayed files, the number of bytes 
remaining on the disk, and the number of remaining directory 
entries.  It also shows SYS, ARC, R/O, and other file attributes, 
and displays files from all user areas in a single listing.  
Originally written for CP/M 2.2 and above, it is designed to give 
most of the information a user requires, while remaining under 4K 
in size.  This version of D runs only under ZCPR3 and Z3PLUS.

Give D a little time and the value of the various features will 
become obvious.

USAGE:

     D {dir:}{<{afn}.aft>} {{/}<options>}

If a drive and user or named directory is omitted, the current 
drive and user is assumed.  If a filename is omitted then all 
files (*.*) is assumed.  If a filetype is given without a 
filename, DA wildcards the filename.  If no option is given then 
all non-system files are displayed.

Options must be preceded by a space and slash (/), unless a DU or 
DIR specification and/or a filename or filetype is given.  
Several options may be included without intervening spaces.  A 
filename mask may include slashes, but if it begins with a slash 
then the mask must be preceded by a DIR or DU specification, or 
simply a colon.

D is re-entrant and may be used with the GO command.

The number of columns used for the display varies, depending on 
the number of files, the options chosen, and the width of your 
screen.

OPTIONS:  All options are specified after a space and slash.  If 
two successive slashes are used, then a brief usage message is 
displayed.

     A    archived files only
     B    include both non-system and system files
     C    comprehensive, complete file control block information
     F    suppress file sizes
     N    no formfeeds to printer
     O    read-only files only
     P    send to printer
     R    reset disk system
     S    only system files
     U    include files from all user areas
     W    only read/write files
     X    do not sort
     Z    only non-archived files

EXAMPLES:

     A0>d b: /a     displays all the archived files from the
                    current user area (0) on drive B.

     A0>d e4:       displays all non-system files from user 4 on
                    drive E.

     A0>d /so       displays all the read-only system files from
                    the current user area and drive (A0).

     M0>d edit:foo.*  displays all non-system files named FOO
                    from the named directory EDIT.

     A0>d c23:.bar b  displays all files, both system and non-
                    system, from user 23 on drive C with a file-
                    type of .BAR.

     B1>d :/*.* u   displays all filenames beginning with a
                    slash in all user areas of drive B (the
                    default drive).

EXPLANATIONS OF OPTIONS:  Some options, particularly those that 
regulate the display, are mutually exclusive.  If two or more 
such options are given in the command line, generally the more 
comprehensive options take precedence.  Unknown options are 
ignored.

     A    Archived files only.  This filters for files with the 
          Archive bit set and only those files are displayed.  
          (The Archive attribute is a CP/M 3.0 feature that has 
          also been implemented by ZRDOS, ZSDOS, and other 2.2 
          replacements).  See also Z option.

     B    Both system and non-system files included.  This option 
          turns off the system file filter and displays all files 
          on the disk, both system and non-system.  System files 
          are highlighted, however.  See also S option.

     C    Comprehensive file information.  Displays the complete 
          directory entry for the selected files.  The files are 
          unsorted but the filters work normally (the default is 
          all non-system files.  All file attributes, including 
          F1 through F8, are shown using highlighting on the 
          corresponding characters of the filename.

     F    File sizes suppressed.  Displays files without file 
          size information, resulting in a more compact display, 
          with one additional column of filenames.

     N    No formfeeds.  If the P option is specified, this 
          option causes formfeeds to be suppressed.  Without the 
          P option, N has no effect.

     0    Read-only files only.  This filters for files that have 
          the RO attribute set, and only those files are 
          displayed.  See also W option.

     P    Printer echo.  Sends the directory to the printer, as 
          well as to the screen (but there is no page pause if 
          the screen fills).  Normally the printer listing is 
          paged (every 4 lines less than your page length), and a 
          final formfeed is sent when the listing is completed, 
          but see also N option.

     R    Reset disk system.  The disk system is reset before the 
          directory is read, so that the correct disk space is 
          given under CP/M 2.2 compatible systems if the disk is 
          changed.  This option should not be necessary under 
          CP/M Plus.

     S    System files only.  This filters out non-system files 
          and displays only system files.  See also B option.

     U    All users included.  Displays files from all user areas 
          of a disk in a single listing.  

     W    Read/write files only.  This option displays only 
          files that are not read-only.  See also R option.

     X    Cancel sort.  The directory files is not sorted in the 
          display.  This is handy to find out the order that the 
          filenames appear in the directory.  Some files with 
          multiple directory entries that are not sequential will 
          be listed more than once.

     Z    Non-archived files only.  This filters for files that 
          do not have the Archive bit set and allows you to 
          determine how many files need to be backed up.  See 
          also A option.

DISPLAY FEATURES:  The directory display is fairly obvious, but a 
few items might need clarification.

The default filter excludes system files.

Sorting the file entries alphabetically by filename is also a 
default.  Files, sorted or unsorted, are displayed in a columnar 
format.

System files are displayed in alternate video (dim or reverse), 
when the B or S option is used, if alternate video is supported 
by your TCAP.

Following the file size is either a k (for kilobytes) or an r 
(for a read-only file).  The size is always in kilobytes, 
regardless of the letter.  If the letters are uppercase (K or R) 
then the corresponding file has the Archive bit set.

The characters in the filename display are reverse-cased.  Most 
filenames will be in lowercase, but a filename in lowercase 
(it's easy to do with MBASIC) is displayed in uppercase.

If a directory entry has a non-printable character in it, the 
character is replaced by a question mark (?).

If the C option is used, any space characters with an attribute 
bit set are replaced with an asterisk (*), so the attribute can 
be displayed using dim video.

SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS:  Be cautious when the disk in question is 
read-only.  Incredibly spurious results can occur, especially 
under CP/M 3.0.  For that reason D will display a "Disk is Read 
Only" message, so you can treat the results with a grain of salt.  
You can also use the R option (reset disk system) to eliminate 
the problem.

If you use CP/M 3.0, you may have noticed that single-letter 
program names followed by the name of a file on another disk 
confuses the CCP.  That is, if you type (from the prompt)
     A>d b:*.bar
the CCP can't find D and reports an error.  This is a bug in the 
CCP and there are public domain patches available to fix it.  If 
your CCP isn't patched, I recommend renaming single-letter 
programs like D to something else under CP/M 3.0.  Try something 
like DD.COM.  Or you can use any single character name above P.

CP/M 3.0 supports disk labels, which are a directory entry under 
user 32.  If D is assembled with the DSKLBL label TRUE, the D 
looks for a user 32 entry and, if it finds one, lists it as the 
disk name just after the user/drive callout.  User 32 is not 
available to D under any other circumstances.  I left this 
feature in as an assembly-time option because it is probably more 
useful for users of floppy drives under CP/M Plus than named 
directories.  If users of CP/M 2.2 desire such labels on their 
disks, they must find a way to install a directory label entry in 
user 32.  Any disk utility, such as DU, could be used to do this 
by modifying a null (0K) directory entry to user 32.  Only 
experienced users should try this.  The regular version of D 
display ZCPR3 named directories instead of disk labels.

INSTALLATION:  Installation is no longer required.  The alternate 
video string is determined from your TCAP.  The width and length 
of your screen and the page length of your printer are determined 
from your environment descriptor.

There are two assembly-time options that may be set in the source 
file, however.  Set DSKLBL to True if you'd rather display CP/M 
Plus disk labels, than ZCPR3 directory names.  Set REVVID to True 
if you use reverse video for highlighting.

HISTORY:  The source code began as a disassembly of NEW-D.COM 
using DASM 1.6 by Richard Conn and Joe Wright.

Version 1.0 -- Hank Blake -- 1984
     For CP/M 2 and 3.  Source code not released.

Version 1.1 -- Gene Pizzetta -- June 25, 1989
     For ZCPR3.  Source code derived from disassembly of original
     COM file.  Added DU and DIR support under ZCPR3.  Added "//"
     help screen.  Option delimiter changed from "[" to "/".  "G"
     (specific user area) option eliminated.  Several other
     cosmetic changes.

Version 1.2 -- Gene Pizzetta -- July 29, 1989
     Now searches for filenames containing slashes, but not
     filenames beginning with a slash unless it is preceded by a
     DU or DIR specification (actually, a single colon will do).
     Added R option to reset disk system.  Renamed old R option
     to O option (to include only read-only files).  Added TCAP
     support for dim or reverse video; no installation required.

Version 1.3 -- Gene Pizzetta -- August 21, 1989
     No longer sends initial formfeed to printer; instead sends
     formfeed after every 62 lines and a final formfeed after
     printing directory, unless "N" option is used.  Changed
     "Ext" to "Typ" in display.  Now prints ZCPR3 named directory
     following DU specification, if the DSKLBL label below is set
     to FALSE, otherwise looks for CP/M Plus disk label.

Version 1.4 -- Gene Pizzetta -- September 8, 1989
     Horizontal lines in dim video.  Added equate for reverse
     video version.  Revamped command line parser:  slash (/)
     no longer required before options, if option list is second
     token on the command line; and if a filetype is given, but
     not a filename, the filename is automatically wildcarded.

Version 1.5 -- Gene Pizzetta -- October 6, 1989
     Corrected problem with file mask, DU, and option selection
     that only occurred under Backgrounder ii.  Now reads
     environment to determine the number of lines on the screen,
     number of screen columns, and number of lines on printer
     page.  Now re-entrant for use with the "GO" command.

COPYRIGHT:  The original version of D.COM is copyright (c) 1984 
by Hank Blake, Source Maverick, San Diego, California.  According 
to that copyright, you may use D.COM for your own purposes other 
than selling it.  You may distribute it as you wish, as long as 
you do not charge for the program.  D.COM may be distributed on a 
disk with other programs, for which there is a copy charge only 
associated with the disk.  The copy charge may not exceed US 
$2.00 in 1984 dollars, however.  The author assumes no liability 
whatsoever with respect to another party's usage of D.COM, your 
acceptance of this statement being a prerequisite to said party's 
use of the program.

The changes made in this version are numerous and are not 
copyright, but they would be of little use by themselves.

I hope to more improvements in this program in future releases, 
including support of re-entrancy for use with the GO command.

If you have any suggestions, complaints, or bug reports, please 
let me know.

     Gene Pizzetta
     481 Revere St.
     Revere, MA 02151

     Voice:  (617) 284-0891
     Newton Centre Z-Node:  (617) 965-7259
     Lilliput Z-Node:  (312) 649-1730
