
Option E -- Erase destination without asking.  Ordinarily MOVE will prompt 
with "exists, Erase?", if a file with the same name is found in the 
destination directory.  If you would prefer that existing destination files 
be erased by default, select "Yes".  The default can be toggled via the 
command line "E" option.  The action of this option is overridden by Option 
N below.

Option N -- No move if destination file exists.  Selecting "Yes" means that 
by default MOVE will not attempt to move a file when another file with the 
same name already exists in the destination directory.  However, this 
option has priority over Option E above.  If this option is set "Yes", 
neither the E configuration option nor the "E" command line option will 
have any effect unless the command line "N" option is used.

Option I -- Inspect mode.  In inspect mode MOVE prompts the user before 
each file is moved.  If, for some strange reason, you prefer inspect mode 
by default, make this "Yes".  The default is toggled by the command line 
"I" option.

Option S -- System files.  Set this option to "Yes" and MOVE will ignore 
system (hidden) files by default.  Set it to "No" to always include system 
files.  The command line "S" option toggles the default mode.

Option Q -- Quiet mode.  If this configuration option is "Yes", MOVE will 
be in quiet mode by default.  In quiet mode only required prompts and error 
messages are displayed.  If the ZCPR3 quiet flag is on, MOVE defaults to 
quiet mode regardless of the choice made here.  The default setting can be 
toggled with the command line "Q" option.

Option R -- Always display results.  In quiet mode, as distributed, MOVE 
suppresses the final summary line giving the number of files moved.  If you 
would prefer to always see this message, select "Yes".

Option C -- Error on user abort.  MOVE sets the program error flag and 
invokes the error handler, if one is running, whenever an error is 
detected.  As distributed, MOVE considers a user abort an error.  This 
method can be very handy if you want to also abort a running alias or batch 
file.  If you find it irritating, however, select "No".

