                 DIFF Version 3.0 Documentation
                        February 19, 1989
                          Carson Wilson


                          - Contents -

          1.  Overview.

          2.  System Requirements.

          3.  Purpose.

          4.  Operation.

          5.  Usage.

              5.1.  Command Line Syntax.

                  5.1.1.  File Specifications.

                  5.1.2.  Options.

                      5.1.2.1.  D - Test Datestamps Only.
                      5.1.2.2.  I - Ignore Datestamps  
                      5.1.2.3.  M - Perform Multiple Comparison.
                      5.1.2.4.  Q - Perform Quiet Comparison.
                      5.1.2.4.  V - Perform Verbose Comparison.
                      5.1.2.6.  Combining Options.

              5.2.  Advanced Use With Command Scripts.

          6.  Customizing DIFF.

          7.  Error Handling.

          8.  Acknowledgements.

          9.  Legal Use of These Files.



1.  Overview.

     DIFF version 3.0 is an extensively modified and improved 
version of the original ZCPR 3.0 DIFF utility by Richard Conn.  
The program's basic functions have been enhanced to take 
advantage of ZCPR 3.3 and 3.4, and several additional functions 
have been added.


2.  System Requirements.

     DIFF now requires ZCPR versions 3.3 and above to operate.  
Additional features are available if DIFF is used under ZSDOS, 
Z3PLUS, and/or DosDisk, but these system enhancements are not 
required by DIFF.  DIFF100.COM loads at 100 hex and requires 
memory from 100 hex to about 3200 hex.  DIFF6000.COM loads at 
6000 hex and requires memory from 100 hex to about 9100 hex.  
Insufficient memory causes DIFF to abort with an error message.


3.  Purpose.

     DIFF quickly compares two files and reports the results to 
the screen and to the ZCPR environment.  This is useful in 
verifying backup copies of files or eliminating duplicate copies. 
Because DIFF reports its findings to the ZCPR environment, it may 
be used with command scripts for automated file maintanence.

     In fact, while DIFF can produce a byte-by-byte report of 
file differences, other programs such as Rob Friefeld's BCOMP or 
Malcom Kemp's CPA are more suited to making detailed file 
comparisons.  DIFF's main strength is as a non-interactive, 
command-line or script driven utility.


4.  Operation.

     By default, DIFF determines file equivalence using the most 
efficient means available.  It first checks for matching file 
names and datestamps and assumes that files with the same name 
which were created or last modified during the same minute are 
identical.  This is much faster in most cases than performing a 
complete data test.  If file datestamps are not present, DIFF 
falls back to a normal data comparison, stopping at the first 
difference, user abort command, or end of file.  If a data test 
is desired regardless of datestamp information, the /I option can 
be used to tell DIFF to ignore datestamps and proceed directly to 
a data comparison.

     In comparing file datestamps, DIFF first tries to compare 
the "last modified" stamps.  If a file's "last modified" stamp is 
missing, that file's "create" stamp is used instead.  If either 
file is missing both create and modify stamps, DIFF falls back on 
file data to determine equivalence.

     DIFF communicates its results both to the screen and to the 
ZCPR environment.  The program error byte is set to true 
("ERROR") by default for each file compare, and is only reset to 
false when a matching pair of files is found.  Thus all of the 
following conditions will set the program error byte to "true:"

                   a. Either or both files missing
                   b. User abort
                   c. Files do not match

     ZCPR register zero is set to reflect the results of 
filestamp comparisons.  Register zero is set as follows:

     Register
     0 Value        Condition
     -------        ---------------------------------------------
          0         No stamp comparison was performed, either due 
                    to the /I option or because one or both 
                    stamps were not available.
          1         Source 1 is more recent.
          2         Source 2 is more recent.
          3         Sources 1 and 2 have matching stamps.


     Unless the /V Verbose option is given, DIFF simply reports 
the results of file stamp comparisons (if any) and data 
comparisons to the screen, telling which file was more recent and 
whether files match or not.  The /V option may be used to 
generate a more detailed report of file data differences (see 
below).


5.  Usage.

5.1.  Command Line Syntax.

     DIFF's command line consists of the command verb, followed 
by one or two unambiguous file specifications, optionally 
followed by one or more option characters:

              DIFF [dir:]ufn [dir:][ufn] [/][options]

A leading slash must introduce options if only one file 
specification was given, to prevent DIFF from confusing options 
with filespecs.


5.1.1.  File Specifications.

     The first file spec is given in the command and is referred 
to as "Source 1."  The second file spec is either given in the 
command or is filled in by DIFF and is referred to as "Source 2".

     If only one file specification is given, Source 2 is assumed 
to have the same name as Source 1 and to reside in the current 
directory.  For example, the command

WORK>diff root:myfile.txt

compares ROOT:MYFILE.TXT with WORK:MYFILE.TXT.  If only a 
directory is given for the second file, DIFF assumes a file of 
the same name as the first, but in the specified directory.

WORK>diff myfile.txt root:

therefore compares WORK:MYFILE.TXT with ROOT:MYFILE.TXT.  This is 
equivalent to the previous example with the exception that Source 
1 and Source 2 are reversed.  This is an important difference 
only when interpreting results stored by DIFF in ZCPR register 0 
(see table above).

     Since DIFF uses ZCPR's command line parser when interpreting 
drive, user and directory specifications, directory security is 
enforced to current system levels, and DIFF may safely be used 
with secure systems.


5.1.2.  Options.

     One or more of the following option characters may be given 
following the file specifications:

                    D - test Datestamps only
                    I - Ignore datestamps  
                    M - perform Multiple comparison
                    Q - perform Quiet comparison
                    V - perform Verbose comparison

As mentioned above, if only one filespec is given, option 
characters must be introduced with the slash character ("/").


5.1.2.1.  D - Test Datestamps Only.

     Normally, unless matching filenames and datestamps are 
detected DIFF falls back on a file data comparison.  The /D 
option causes DIFF to exit as soon as the datestamp comparison 
has been attempted.  This is useful in situations where only the 
temporal relationships of files are of interest.


5.1.2.2.  I - Ignore Datestamps.

     The /I option is the complement of the /D option, and causes 
DIFF to skip datestamp comparisons and go directly to a file data 
comparison.  Register 0 is always set to 0 by this option. 


5.1.2.3.  M - Perform Multiple Comparison.

     If the /M option is given, DIFF repeatedly prompts the user 
for new floppy disks, allowing a file to be compared with other 
files on several floppy disks.


5.1.2.4.  Q - Perform Quiet Comparison.

     The /Q option causes DIFF to report only error messages to 
the screen; all other screen output is suppressed.  This option 
is designed for use with command scripts which must maintain 
screen control.


5.1.2.5.  V - Perform Verbose Comparison.

     Normally, DIFF reports only the final results of a 
comparison to the screen.  Selecting the /V option causes DIFF to 
display the ASCII, Hex, and Decimal equivalents of all 
non-matching bytes.


5.1.2.6.  Combining Options.

     From what we have said above, it should be obvious that 
certain option combinations produce meaningless or contradictory 
results.  For example, combining the /D and /I options causes 
DIFF to do nothing at all.  The /Q option contradicts the /V and 
/M options, and for this reason where /Q is used it takes 
precedence over /M and /V, forcing a single, non-verbose 
comparison.


5.2.  Advanced Use With Command Scripts.

     Where DIFF really excels is in its ability to pass file 
comparison information to the ZCPR environment.  This capability 
can be used in conjunction with ZCPR's Flow Control feature and 
other programs to automate file maintenance in various ways.

     The Flow Control Package (FCP) can be configured to detect 
the status of ZCPR's program error byte and register byte zero 
and set the flow state accordingly.  Here is a simple example 
using DIFF, FCP, and ERA commands to erase file1 only if file1 
equals file2:

WORK>diff file1 file2;if ~er;era file1;fi

     The following example uses DIFF, FCP, CP, and ECHO commands 
to copy the most recent of file1 and file2 to the other file:

WORK>diff file1 file2 /d;if 0 1;cp file1 file2;else;if 0 2;<<
     cp file2 file1;else;echo error;fi;fi

The above command is equivalent to the following pseudo-code:

run DIFF
if file1 was created/modified after file2
   copy file1 to file2
   else
   if file2 was created/modified after file1
      copy file2 to file1
      else
      echo error (files or datestamps missing, or files equal)
   fi
fi

If one or both files are missing or have missing stamps, or if 
the filestamps are equal, the word "ERROR" appears on the screen 
and no copy operation is performed.

     Many more complicated scripts are possible.  The two 
preceding samples were issued from the command line, but command 
scripts are most useful when issued from a script processing 
program, such as ZEX or ZFILER.  For example, the following 
command script can be used under ZFILER to update all 
non-archived files at the current directory to the current user 
area of drive C:.  To use the macro, I press G-T (group tag), 
followed by G-A (group archive) and finally G-ESC-A (group macro 
A):

A $d$u:;$!diff c:$f /q;if er;copy $f c: /ae;else;fa $f a;fi

If DIFF does not find a matching backup on drive C, the ZSDOS 
COPY program makes a fresh archive from the current drive.  If a 
matching backup was found, the ZSDOS FA command simply sets the 
file's archive attribute.

     Finally, DIFF can be used to select files by their temporal 
relation to another file and process them accordingly.  For 
instance, to append all files created before a particular file to 
an archive file, I use the following ZFILER macro, invoked by 
pressing GT, then G-ESC-N:

N $d$u:;diff $p $"Newer file: " /dq;if 0 2;<<
     append $f $"File to append to:";era $f;fi

     These suggestions do not exhaust even the applications I 
have found for DIFF.  I am sure there are many others, and that 
you will discover ways of automating file and directory 
maintenance with DIFF that I have not yet thought of.


6.  Customizing DIFF.

     As distributed, DIFF's Datestamp, Ignore, Multiple, Quiet, 
and Verbose options are "off" by default, and are turned on when 
the option character is given in the command line.  The sense of 
any or all of the command line options may be reversed by 
altering the five bytes following the ASCII label "[DIMQV>" at 
address 10d hex in the program itself.

     As distributed, the five bytes at 112 hex are 0,0,0,0,0.  To 
change an option to "on" by default, set the corresponding byte 
following the label to 0FF hex.  For example, to make DIFF 
perform Verbose comparisons by default, change the byte at 116 
hex from 00 to 0FFh.  Now DIFF will display all differences 
between files UNLESS the /V option is given on the command line.


7.  Error Handling.

     If ZCPR 3.3 or above is not present or if available memory 
is insufficient, DIFF aborts to the command line with an error 
message.

     If an ambiguous file name was used in the command or if an 
illegal ZCPR directory or drive/user combination was given, DIFF 
chains to the ZCPR error handler if present, or aborts to the 
command line.

     Missing files simply cause DIFF to set the program error 
byte rather than chaining to the error handler.  This allows 
command scripts to retain control in the event of missing files.  
See the ZFILER command script in section 5.2 for an example of 
this.


8.  Acknowledgements.

     The use of file datestamps to compare files was adapted from 
Bridger Mitchell's DATSWEEP utility, which is part of 
Plu*Perfect's DateStamper system and will be included with the 
ZSDOS operating system.


9.  Legal Use of These Files.

     DIFF is an official ZCPR utility.  As such, it is released 
to the public for personal use, but commercial use must be 
licensed by Alpha Systems.

     I encourage you to explore the source code, suggest 
improvements, and document errors.  However, please obtain 
permission before redistributing any of these files in altered 
form.  This will prevent confusion by allowing your work to be 
coordinated with the efforts of others.

Carson Wilson may be reached via

         Antelope Freeway Remote Access System, Chicago
                          312-764-5162
                  300-1200-2400 Baud, 24 Hours

As I am sysop of this system, you may leave comments for me when 
you apply for access.
